Cleaning data (part 2)
Advanced cleaning with OpenRefine
link for slides: http://bit.ly/bu-cleaning-data-p2 
Be sure to check out these installation instructions before starting this workshop.  

First steps:
Make sure you've downloaded and installed OpenRefine:
http://openrefine.org/download.html
1) Go to the Downloads page
2) Select the appropriate application for your computer
See more information on downloading the OpenRefine software here: https://github.com/OpenRefine/OpenRefine/wiki/Installation-Instructions 



What we'll cover
- First things first (software installation check)
- Web technologies and non-rectangular data types
- Wrectangling your data
- Make it reproducible  
- Share your work!
Many times the data we encounter on the web (and other places) is in a format we can't directly use, so we need to make some changes to the structure in order to make it more useful.

The internet is full of all kinds of data types, and we want to be able to access, clean, format, restructure, visualize, and analyze all of it. OpenRefine is a tool that helps us take in a variety of data formats and clean it into something we can use.

What is/where are data?
Data are everywhere we look, and they can be used to measure nearly anything we can imagine, or everything we can say or do. 
Today we capture and store a massive amount of data electronically. But often times, the format and structure for capturing and measuring data are not ideal for creating visualizations or performing analyses. This means cleaning...


  
Data get collected from apps, devices, sensors, scanned documents, the internet and relational databases. This usually results in a variety of file formats, and before a software algorithm can go looking for answers, the data must be cleaned up and converted into a unified form that the algorithm can understand.



But cleaning isn't sexy...
https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/18/technology/for-big-data-scientists-hurdle-to-insights-is-janitor-work.html




Fundamentals – Formats, Types, and Encodings
		 	 	 		
			
				
					
Text files versus binary files 
				
			
		

